# cogsv1 readings

## HEXACO Review of Research and Theory
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1088868314523838?icid=int.sj-abstract.similar-articles.2

[HEXACO Review of Research and Theory.pdf]

> The HEXACO model of personality structure consists of six dimensions—Honesty-Humility (H), Emotionality (E), Extraversion (X), Agreeableness (A), Conscientiousness (C), and Openness to Experience (O)

> The six-factor structure overlaps heavily with the classic Big Five of early English lexical studies. The X, C, and O factors are largely the same as their Big Five counterparts, apart from the deliberate exclusion of intellectual ability from HEXACO O. However, the H, A, and E dimensions do not correspond isomorphically to any of the classic Big Five factors; instead, these three dimensions incorporate the variance associated with Big Five Agreeableness and Neuroticism (versus Emotional Stability) factors as well as additional variance not captured within the classic Big Five. To use Goldberg’s (2001) term, the variance of the Big Five is “reorganized” in the six-factor structure.

see page 4 for numerical comparison between HEXACO and FFM

> Adjectives that typically define the lexical E factorrecall that in the HEXACO framework, E represents Emotionality, not eXtraversion—include vulnerable, sensitive, anxious, and sentimental versus fearless, tough, independent, and unemotional. This factor shares some content with Big Five Neuroticism (e.g., anxiety), but lacks the anger-related aspects of Neuroticism and instead contains sentimentality-related traits that are associated with Big Five Agreeableness. Adjectives that typically define the lexical A factor include peaceful, gentle, patient, and agreeable versus quick-tempered, choleric, stubborn, and quarrelsome. The lexical A factor shares some content with the classic Big Five Agreeableness factor (e.g., gentleness), but lacks the sentimentality-related aspects of that factor and instead contains (at its low pole) the anger-related traits that are associated with Big Five Neuroticism. Adjectives that typically define the lexical H factor include honest, sincere, fair, and modest versus greedy, conceited, deceitful, and pretentious. In the classic Big Five framework, these terms are typically peripheral elements of Big Five Agreeableness.

## Egges: Generic Personality Modeling
- https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/A-Model-for-Personality-and-Emotion-Simulation-Egges-Kshirsagar/32c0c297740bb5bbaefb186b3f7525d5bca909bc
- https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220356976_Generic_personality_and_emotion_simulation_for_conversational_agents
- [A Model for Personality and Emotion Simulation.pdf]
- [Generic personality and emotion simulation for conversational agents.pdf]

> The effect of personality and emotion on agent behaviour has been researched quite a lot, whether it concerns a general inﬂuence on behaviour [4], or a more traditional planning-based method [5]. Various rule based models [6] and probabilistic models [7] have been reported in the past. How behaviour should be inﬂuenced by personality and emotion depends on the system that is used and it is out of the scope of this paper.

paper presents a generic personality, mood and emotion (PME) model

> An individual is an entity that is constantly changing. So, when we speak of an individual, we always refer to it relative to a time t. The moment that the individual starts existing is deﬁned by t = 0. The abstract entity that represents the individual at a time t we will call I t from now on. An individual has a personality and an emotional state (we do not yet take mood into consideration). The model based on this assumption is called PE. The personality is constant and initialized with a set of values on t = 0. The emotional state is dynamic and it is initialized to 0 at t = 0. Thus we deﬁne I t as a tuple (p, e t ), where p represents the personality and e t represents the emotional state at time t. In our example, Julie will portray emotions (that change over time) based on what happens, but how she obtains these emotions and the behaviour that results from it, depends on a static part of her being, the personality.

> There exist many personality models, each of them consisting of a set of dimensions, where every dimension is a speciﬁc property of the personality. Take for example the OCEAN model [3], which has ﬁve dimensions (Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, Neuroticism) or the PEN model [2] that has three dimensions. Generalizing from these theories, we assume that a personality has n dimensions, where each dimension is represented by a value in the interval [0, 1]. A value of 0 corresponds to an absence of the dimension in the personality; a value of 1 corresponds to a maximum presence of the dimension in the personality. The personality p of an individual can then be represented by the following vector:

> Emotional state has a similar structure as personality, but it changes over time. The emotional state is a set of emotions that have a certain intensity. For example, the OCC model deﬁnes 22 emotions, while Ekman [15] deﬁnes 6 emotions for facial expression classiﬁcation. We deﬁne the emotional state e t as an m-dimensional vector, where all m emotion intensities are represented by a value in the interval [0, 1]. A value of 0 corresponds to an absence of the emotion; a value of 1 corresponds to a maximum intensity of the emotion. This vector is given as follows:

> An extended version of the PE model, the PME model, is given by including mood. We now deﬁne the individual I t as a triple (p, m t , e t ), where m t represents the mood at a time t. We deﬁne mood as a rather static state of being, that is less static than personality and less ﬂuent than emotions [8]. Mood can be one-dimensional (being in a good or a bad mood) or perhaps multi-dimensional (feeling in love, being paranoid). Whether or not it is justiﬁed from a psychological perspective to have a multi-dimensional mood is not in the scope of this paper. However, to increase generality, we will provide for a possibility of having multiple mood dimensions. We deﬁne a mood dimension as a value in the interval [−1, 1]. Supposing that there are k mood dimensions, the mood can be described as follows:

> In the PME model (which includes the mood), the update process slightly changes. When an emotion inﬂuence has to be processed, the update now happens in two steps. The ﬁrst step consists in updating the mood; the second step consists of updating the emotional state. The mood is updated by a function Ψ m (p, ω t , σ t , a) that calculates the mood change, based on the personality, the emotional state history, the mood history and the emotion inﬂuence. The mood is internally updated using a function Ω m (p, ω t , σ t ). Thus the new mood mt+1  can be calculated as follows:

## Three-Dimensional Model for Emotion Based on Fuzzy Theory
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/An-Improved-Three-Dimensional-Model-for-Emotion-on-Zhu-Li/a9a22e7e28371842162cbb1f4b940cc4d2ec1b17

[Three-Dimensional Model for Emotion Based on Fuzzy Theory.pdf]

> In the basic emotion model, Ekman’s six basic emotions correspond to facial expressions and emotions, but they do not indicate the relationship between different emotions. However, the three-dimensional state space emotion model takes anger, joy and fear as the axis, which can not only intuitively and quantitatively describe the type of emotion, and also analyze the probability of emotional changes. Thus combined with the expression recognition system applied in the human-computer interaction system, it has the following shortcomings:
> • The types of emotions considered in some models cannot be obtained only by expression classification recognition.
> • The model does not consider how to extract detailed main emotional information from facial expressions.
> Combined with the application background of human-computer interaction system, in order to further improve the emotion model, this paper improves the original three-dimensional state space emotion model in the following aspects:
> • In order to match emotions with facial expressions, six types of emotions are selected as emotion categories. Ekman maps basic emotions to related basic facial expressions and defines six basic emotions including anger, fear, sadness, happiness, surprise, and disgust.
> • In order to visually express the position and relationship of different emotions, the three-dimensional state space method emotion model is selected as the basic structure model, considering three basic emotions, namely fear, anger, joy, and certain emotions at a certain time. These three basic emotions are added by different weights.
> • Projecting the six types of emotions in the selected Ekman into the state space emotion model to intuitively and quickly obtaining the positional relationship between the recognized emotion and the expected emotion from the three-dimensional map based on the expression recognition.
> • According to the actual situation, we can know that each type of emotion has a certain range of variation. Therefore, in order to distinguish the intensity of each type of emotion, combined with the fuzzy theory, each type of emotion is defined to have a certain spherical range, and different areas in the range are expressed. The degree of strong, medium, or weak emotions of a certain kind of emotion is defined by fuzzy rules. The emotional model obtained by combining Ekman’s basic emotion, state space method emotion model and fuzzy theory is shown in Figure 2. The schematic diagram of each type of emotion degree is shown in Figure 3. In Figure 3, r 1 , r 2 , r 3 indicate the sphere radius of different degrees of emotion.

> Let D show the Euclidean distance from the measured emotion to the standard emotion [12], that is, the distance between the projection point corresponding to the tested emotion and the basic standard emotional center, as shown in formula (12):
